RELEASING.md, before:

# Creating a new release

1. Prep public docs PR with the new version in data file `/honeycomb-opentelemetry-java/release.json`

1. Run `./gradlew generateLicenseReport` to ensure all project dependency licenses are correclty represented in this repository. If there are any changes, submit PR to update licenses.

1. Update the `project.version` in the root build.gradle file with the new release version. Snapshot version is one patch bump ahead of the new release (e.g. if we're releasing `1.0.0` then the corresponding snapshot would be `1.0.1`)

1. Update the version in `DistroMetadata.java` with the new release version
    - When updating the OTel Agent/SDK version, update the OTLP version header in `DistroMetadata.java`

1. Update the Changelog

1. If the new release updates the OpenTelemetry SDK and/or agent versions, update the `Latest release built with` section in the [README](./README.md).

1. Once the above changes are merged into `main`, tag `main` with the new version, e.g. `v0.1.1`. Push the tags. This will kick off CI, which will publish a draft GitHub release, and publish to Maven.

1. Update Release Notes on the new draft GitHub release, and publish that.

1. Merge public docs PR and onboard docs PR

Voila!

Commit message:

rel: prep release v1.5.2 (#433)
## Which problem is this PR solving?

- release prep for v1.5.2

## Short description of the changes

- update releasing doc for how to find proto version in otel java, and
how to update in tests
- update version in root build.gradle to 1.5.2
- update otel version to 1.27.0 and proto version to 0.20.0 in
distrometadata
- update changelog for v1.5.2
- update readme with otel versions 1.27.0
- update test with new proto version

A docs PR has been prepped with the new release version, to be merged
once this release is out.

RELEASING.md, after:

# Creating a new release

1. Prep public docs PR with the new version in data file `/honeycomb-opentelemetry-java/release.json`

1. Run `./gradlew generateLicenseReport` to ensure all project dependency licenses are correctly represented in this repository. If there are any changes, submit PR to update licenses.

1. Update the `project.version` in the root build.gradle file with the new release version. Snapshot version is one patch bump ahead of the new release (e.g. if we're releasing `1.0.0` then the corresponding snapshot would be `1.0.1`)

1. Update the version in `DistroMetadata.java` with the new release version
    - When updating the OTel Agent/SDK version, update the OTLP version header as needed in `DistroMetadata.java`
    - This can be found in upstream repo `/dependencyManagement/build.gradle.kts`

1. If OTLP proto version changes in previous step, update tests in `EnvironmentConfigurationTest.java`

1. Update the Changelog

1. If the new release updates the OpenTelemetry SDK and/or agent versions, update the `Latest release built with` section in the [README](./README.md).

1. Once the above changes are merged into `main`, tag `main` with the new version, e.g. `v0.1.1`. Push the tags. This will kick off CI, which will publish a draft GitHub release, and publish to Maven.

1. Update Release Notes on the new draft GitHub release, and publish that.

1. Merge public docs PR and onboard docs PR

Voila!
